packages/shared-state-async/README.adoc, before:


.Build with debugging enabled
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
make package/feeds/libremesh/shared-state-async/clean package/feeds/libremesh/shared-state-async/compile -j$(nproc) CONFIG_DEBUG=y
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.Copy on verde e blu
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
scp -O bin/packages/mips_24kc/libremesh/shared-state-async_*.ipk root@[fe80::ea94:f6ff:fe68:3364%usbe1]:/tmp/
scp -O bin/packages/mips_24kc/libremesh/shared-state-async_*.ipk root@[fe80::6670:2ff:fede:c51e%usbe1]:/tmp/
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.Install
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
opkg install --force-reinstall /tmp/shared-state-async_*.ipk
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.Run with gdb
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
gdbserver :9000 shared-state-async
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.Attach with remote OpenWrt gdb
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
scripts/remote-gdb [fe80::ea94:f6ff:fe68:3364%usbe0]:9000 ./build_dir/target-mips_24kc_musl/shared-state-async-*/shared-state-async

scripts/remote-gdb [fe80::6670:2ff:fede:c51e%usbe0]:9000 ./build_dir/target-mips_24kc_musl/shared-state-async-*/shared-state-async
break shared-state-async.cc:55
run listen
run sync bat-hosts fe80::ea94:f6ff:fe68:3364%br-lan
run sync bat-hosts fe80::d237:45ff:fefc:3cdd%br-lan
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.Stressing the server
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
while Builds/build-lime-shared-state-async-node-Desktop-Debug/shared-state-async sync bat-hosts fe80::ea94:f6ff:fe68:3364%usbeth0; do echo ------------------------------------------------------------------- ;done

while shared-state-async sync bat-hosts fe80::ea94:f6ff:fe68:3364%br-lan; do echo ------------------------------------------------------------------- ;done

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


=== Interesting Readings

https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-developer/gdb

VoCore2: Develop for OpenWrt on Qt Creator
https://vonger.cn/?p=14657

=== Plugin related notes
Plugins must be registered into shared state by using the config file. UCI infrastructure is preferred

mSc="plugin_name"

uci set shared-state.${mSc}=dataType
uci set shared-state.${mSc}.name='plugin-name'
uci set shared-state.${mSc}.scope='community'
uci set shared-state.${mSc}.ttl='1200'
uci set shared-state.${mSc}.update_interval='120'
uci commit shared-state

Publishers must be located at "usr/share/shared-state/publishers"
All Publishers will be called at least once using shared-state-async-publish-all

Sync is called automatically by shared state according to upgrade interval parameter

Commit message:

shared-state-async: improve documentation

packages/shared-state-async/README.adoc, after:


.Build with debugging enabled
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
make package/feeds/libremesh/shared-state-async/clean package/feeds/libremesh/shared-state-async/compile -j$(nproc) CONFIG_DEBUG=y
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.Copy on verde e blu
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
scp -O bin/packages/mips_24kc/libremesh/shared-state-async_*.ipk root@[fe80::ea94:f6ff:fe68:3364%usbe1]:/tmp/
scp -O bin/packages/mips_24kc/libremesh/shared-state-async_*.ipk root@[fe80::6670:2ff:fede:c51e%usbe1]:/tmp/
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.Install
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
opkg install --force-reinstall /tmp/shared-state-async_*.ipk
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.Run with gdb
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
gdbserver :9000 shared-state-async
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.Attach with remote OpenWrt gdb
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
scripts/remote-gdb [fe80::ea94:f6ff:fe68:3364%usbe0]:9000 ./build_dir/target-mips_24kc_musl/shared-state-async-*/shared-state-async

scripts/remote-gdb [fe80::6670:2ff:fede:c51e%usbe0]:9000 ./build_dir/target-mips_24kc_musl/shared-state-async-*/shared-state-async
break shared-state-async.cc:55
run listen
run sync bat-hosts fe80::ea94:f6ff:fe68:3364%br-lan
run sync bat-hosts fe80::d237:45ff:fefc:3cdd%br-lan
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.Stressing the server
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
while Builds/build-lime-shared-state-async-node-Desktop-Debug/shared-state-async sync bat-hosts fe80::ea94:f6ff:fe68:3364%usbeth0; do echo ------------------------------------------------------------------- ;done

while shared-state-async sync bat-hosts fe80::ea94:f6ff:fe68:3364%br-lan; do echo ------------------------------------------------------------------- ;done

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


=== Interesting Readings

https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-developer/gdb

VoCore2: Develop for OpenWrt on Qt Creator
https://vonger.cn/?p=14657

=== Plugin related notes
Plugins must be registered into shared-state-async by using the config file. UCI infrastructure is preferred

[source,console]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
mSc="plugin_name"

uci set shared-state.${mSc}=dataType
uci set shared-state.${mSc}.name='plugin-name'
uci set shared-state.${mSc}.scope='community'
uci set shared-state.${mSc}.ttl='1200'
uci set shared-state.${mSc}.update_interval='120'
uci commit shared-state
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Publishers must be located at +/usr/share/shared-state/publishers+ 
All Publishers will be called at least once using shared-state-async-publish-all

Sync is called automatically by shared-state-async according to "update_interval" parameter
"ttl" stands for "time to live" and will decrease until 0.
Data contents will be erased if "ttl" reaches 0.
