README.md, before:

[![travis](https://api.travis-ci.org/libremesh/lime-packages.svg?branch=develop)](https://travis-ci.org/libremesh/lime-packages)
[![tip for next commit](http://tip4commit.com/projects/804.svg)](http://tip4commit.com/projects/804)

# [LibreMesh][5] packages "Development" release (XX.XX)

[![LibreMesh logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/libremesh/lime-web/master/logo/logo.png)](http://libremesh.org)

[LibreMesh project][5] includes the development of several tools used for deploying libre/free mesh networks.

The firmware (the main piece) will allow simple deployment of auto-configurable, yet versatile, multi-radio mesh networks. Check the [Network Architecture][4] to see the basic ideas.

## Download Precompiled Binaries

This is the easiest way to first test and install LibreMesh in your router.

You can download a firmware image with **generic configuration** of the last **release** at [downloads][9] subdomain.

## Customize and Download a Firmware Image Using online ImageBuilder

We encourage each network community to create its firmware profile on [network-profiles][10] repository and build the images with the [online ImageBuilder][11]. It generates and delivers **customized firmware images** (for example custom ESSID, IP range, additional packets or scripts...). 

## Building a Firmware Image on Your PC

The LibreMesh firmware can be compiled either using the easy to use [lime-sdk][2] tool or manually adding the feed to a [LEDE buildroot][1] environment.

### Using lime-sdk

Refer to [lime-sdk][2] README.

### Using LEDE buildroot

Clone LEDE stable repository, nowadays is version 17.01 (Reboot).

    git clone -b lede-17.01 https://git.lede-project.org/source.git lede
    cd lede

Add lime-packages, libremap and lime-ui-ng feeds to the default ones.

    cp feeds.conf.default feeds.conf
    echo "src-git libremesh https://github.com/libremesh/lime-packages.git" >> feeds.conf
    echo "src-git libremap https://github.com/libremap/libremap-agent-openwrt.git" >> feeds.conf
    echo "src-git limeui https://github.com/libremesh/lime-ui-ng.git" >> feeds.conf

If you want to use a specific branch of lime-packages specify it adding ;nameofthebranch at the end of the relative line. For example:

    src-git lime https://github.com/libremesh/lime-packages.git;17.06

Download the new packages.

    scripts/feeds update -a
    scripts/feeds install -a

Select the router architecture, model and the needed packages in menuconfig.

    make menuconfig

We suggest you to deselect the package _dnsmasq_ from _Base system_ section and to select _dnsmasq-dhcpv6_ in the same section. Then to deselect _odhcpd_ from _Network_ section.

Finally enter the _LiMe_ section and select the wanted LibreMesh features, a good option is to select lime-full. 

Compile the firmware images.

    make

The resulting files will be present in _bin_ directory.


## Get in Touch with LibreMesh Community

### Mailing Lists

The project offers the following mailing lists

* [lime-dev@lists.libremesh.org][7] - This list is used for general development related work.
* [lime-users@lists.libremesh.org][8] - This list is used for project organisational purposes. And for user specific questions.

[1]: https://lede-project.org/docs/guide-developer/quickstart-build-images
[2]: https://github.com/libremesh/lime-sdk
[4]: http://libremesh.org/howitworks.html
[5]: http://libremesh.org/
[7]: https://lists.libremesh.org/mailman/listinfo/lime-dev
[8]: https://lists.libremesh.org/mailman/listinfo/lime-users
[9]: http://repo.libremesh.org/current/
[10]: https://github.com/libremesh/network-profiles/
[11]: https://imagebuilder.libremesh.org/imagebuilder

Commit message:

change LEDE occurrences to OpenWrt

README.md, after:

[![travis](https://api.travis-ci.org/libremesh/lime-packages.svg?branch=develop)](https://travis-ci.org/libremesh/lime-packages)
[![tip for next commit](http://tip4commit.com/projects/804.svg)](http://tip4commit.com/projects/804)

# [LibreMesh][5] packages "Development" release (XX.XX)

[![LibreMesh logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/libremesh/lime-web/master/logo/logo.png)](http://libremesh.org)

[LibreMesh project][5] includes the development of several tools used for deploying libre/free mesh networks.

The firmware (the main piece) will allow simple deployment of auto-configurable, yet versatile, multi-radio mesh networks. Check the [Network Architecture][4] to see the basic ideas.

## Download Precompiled Binaries

This is the easiest way to first test and install LibreMesh in your router.

You can download a firmware image with **generic configuration** of the last **release** at [downloads][9] subdomain.

## Customize and Download a Firmware Image Using online ImageBuilder

We encourage each network community to create its firmware profile on [network-profiles][10] repository and build the images with the [online ImageBuilder][11]. It generates and delivers **customized firmware images** (for example custom ESSID, IP range, additional packets or scripts...). 

## Building a Firmware Image on Your PC

The LibreMesh firmware can be compiled either using the easy to use [lime-sdk][2] tool (recommended) or manually adding the feed to a [OpenWrt buildroot][1] environment.

### Using lime-sdk

Refer to [lime-sdk][2] README.

### Using OpenWrt buildroot

Clone OpenWrt stable repository, nowadays is version 18.06.1.

    git clone https://www.github.com/openwrt/openwrt -b openwrt-18.06
    cd openwrt

Add lime-packages, libremap and lime-ui-ng feeds to the default ones.

    cp feeds.conf.default feeds.conf
    echo "src-git libremesh https://github.com/libremesh/lime-packages.git" >> feeds.conf
    echo "src-git libremap https://github.com/libremap/libremap-agent-openwrt.git" >> feeds.conf
    echo "src-git limeui https://github.com/libremesh/lime-ui-ng.git" >> feeds.conf

If you want to use a specific branch of lime-packages specify it adding ;nameofthebranch at the end of the relative line. For example:

    src-git lime https://github.com/libremesh/lime-packages.git;17.06

Download the new packages.

    scripts/feeds update -a
    scripts/feeds install -a

Select the router architecture, model and the needed packages in menuconfig.

    make menuconfig

We suggest you to deselect the package _dnsmasq_ from _Base system_ section and to select _dnsmasq-dhcpv6_ in the same section. Then to deselect _odhcpd_ from _Network_ section.

Finally enter the _LiMe_ section and select the wanted LibreMesh features, a good option is to select lime-full. 

Compile the firmware images.

    make

The resulting files will be present in _bin_ directory.


## Get in Touch with LibreMesh Community

### Mailing Lists

The project offers the following mailing lists

* [lime-dev@lists.libremesh.org][7] - This list is used for general development related work.
* [lime-users@lists.libremesh.org][8] - This list is used for project organisational purposes. And for user specific questions.

[1]: https://openwrt.org/docs/guide-developer/quickstart-build-images
[2]: https://github.com/libremesh/lime-sdk
[4]: http://libremesh.org/howitworks.html
[5]: http://libremesh.org/
[7]: https://lists.libremesh.org/mailman/listinfo/lime-dev
[8]: https://lists.libremesh.org/mailman/listinfo/lime-users
[9]: http://repo.libremesh.org/current/
[10]: https://github.com/libremesh/network-profiles/
[11]: https://imagebuilder.libremesh.org/imagebuilder
